Issues
======

The dogfooded backlog (:need:`ADR_0012`): every v1 skill port is an
``issue`` directive, status-driven through the triage state machine
(:need:`ADR_0005`). IDs are allocated dense, max+1 (:need:`ADR_0008`).

.. issue:: Implement /setup-patdhlk-skills
   :id: ISSUE_0001
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0004

   Build the setup skill. It must: read an existing ``ubproject.toml`` and
   propose a role map interactively (persisting it under
   ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.roles]``); scaffold a spec skeleton via
   ``uv init`` / ``uv add`` when no sphinx project exists; detect ``ubc`` on
   PATH and offer the install script when missing, persisting ``builder``;
   offer the sphinx-needs-starter devcontainer (opt-in); append an
   ``## Agent skills`` block to CLAUDE.md/AGENTS.md and offer a strict-build
   CI workflow.

.. issue:: Implement /to-prd
   :id: ISSUE_0002
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0001

   Turn conversation context into one RST document per PRD: a single
   ``feat`` directive with motivation/scope/non-goals prose plus child
   ``req`` directives linked ``:satisfies:`` the feature (:need:`ADR_0010`).
   IDs allocated from a fresh needs.json build (:need:`ADR_0006`,
   :need:`ADR_0008`); mutation ends with the strict gate (:need:`ADR_0007`).

.. issue:: Implement /to-issues
   :id: ISSUE_0003
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0001

   Slice a PRD's ``req`` directives into independently-grabbable issues.
   Backend sphinx-needs: write ``issue`` directives linked to the req IDs.
   Backend github: file via ``gh``, with ``Implements: REQ_xxxx`` in the
   body and ``:github:`` back-references on the needs (:need:`ADR_0009`).

.. issue:: Implement /triage
   :id: ISSUE_0004
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0001

   Drive issues through the state machine
   ``needs-triage → needs-info | ready-for-agent | ready-for-human →
   in-progress → done | wontfix`` (:need:`ADR_0005`). Local backend: query
   needs.json for ``status == needs-triage``, edit ``:status:`` in place —
   git history is the audit trail. GitHub backend: the same states as
   labels.

.. issue:: Implement /qa
   :id: ISSUE_0005
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0001

   Conversational QA session that files issues from bug reports. Local
   backend: append ``issue`` directives (status ``needs-triage``) with
   duplicate detection against a fresh needs.json build.

.. issue:: Port /grill-me
   :id: ISSUE_0006
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0002

   Port unchanged — the skill is backend-agnostic and keeps its name and
   behavior (:need:`ADR_0001`).

.. issue:: Implement /grill-with-docs
   :id: ISSUE_0007
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0002

   Grilling session that challenges a plan against the domain model and
   updates documentation inline — but against the sphinx-needs spec:
   glossary ``term`` directives instead of CONTEXT.md, ``arch-decision``
   directives instead of markdown ADRs (:need:`ADR_0002`).

.. issue:: Implement /decide
   :id: ISSUE_0008
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0002

   Record a design decision as an ``arch-decision`` directive with Context /
   Decision / Consequences structure and links to affected needs. Standalone
   implementation — no pharaoh dependency (:need:`ADR_0011`).

.. issue:: Port /tdd
   :id: ISSUE_0009
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0003

   Red-green-refactor loop with vertical slices. Touchpoint: resolve issue
   references through the backend config when a task cites an ``ISSUE_`` ID
   or a GitHub issue number.

.. issue:: Port /diagnose
   :id: ISSUE_0010
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0003

   Disciplined diagnosis loop (reproduce → minimise → hypothesise →
   instrument → fix → regression-test). Backend touchpoint as in
   :need:`ISSUE_0009`.

.. issue:: Port /review
   :id: ISSUE_0011
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0003

   Review changes since a fixed point along Standards and Spec axes — the
   Spec axis reads the originating issue/req from the configured backend
   and its linked needs.

.. issue:: Port /prototype
   :id: ISSUE_0012
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :implements: FEAT_0003

   Throwaway prototypes to flesh out a design before committing. Largely
   unchanged; findings may feed ``/decide`` (:need:`ISSUE_0008`).

.. issue:: pds lint — mechanized body lint
   :id: ISSUE_0013
   :status: done
   :kind: improvement

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   The strict gate (:need:`ADR_0007`, :need:`ADR_0017`) catches
   structural problems — schema violations, broken links, duplicate
   IDs — but says nothing about the substance of a need body.
   Implement body lint as a ``pds`` verb (:need:`ADR_0014`), runnable
   alone (``pds lint``) and as part of ``pds check``:

   - required sections per type (an ``arch-decision`` must carry
     Context / Decision / Consequences; an ``issue`` body must be
     non-trivial),
   - weasel-word check on ``req`` bodies (vague adjectives without a
     numeric or behavioral criterion),
   - unenumerated-quantifier check on ``req`` bodies (``all`` /
     ``every`` / ``each`` without a stated set),
   - optional per-type body-length bounds.

   Config in ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.lint]``; absent table = all checks
   off, each check individually toggleable. Lint reads a fresh
   needs.json (:need:`ADR_0006`), never the RST source. Violations
   exit 1 with JSON findings; exempt statuses (:need:`ISSUE_0018`) are
   honoured. Depends on the crate scaffold (:need:`ISSUE_0019`).

   **Agent brief** (triage of 2026-06-07; this section is the
   contract — the prose above is context).

   *Category:* enhancement. *Summary:* add a ``lint`` verb to the
   ``pds`` CLI that mechanically checks need bodies from a fresh
   needs.json, standalone and inside ``pds check``.

   *Current behavior.* ``pds`` ships ``build`` / ``check`` /
   ``status`` / ``next``. The corpus reader exposes each need's
   ``content``; the queries module has a shared
   guard→build→load preamble; the config loader parses
   ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.*]`` tables with raw→validated structs and
   fail-on-drift validation; check-shaped verbs emit
   ``{"findings": [{check, severity, need, message}]}`` with
   ``need`` always null so far. ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.gate]`` has
   ``needs_json`` / ``sphinx_command`` only.

   *Desired behavior.*

   - ``pds lint``: rebuild needs.json (non-gating build), load the
     corpus, run every check enabled in
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.lint]``, emit one finding per violation
     (``check`` = ``lint:<rule>``, ``need`` = the offending need's
     ID, actionable ``message``), exit 1 when findings are
     non-empty, else 0. Absent lint table or no enabled checks =
     clean exit 0, empty findings. NO github-backend guard — lint
     covers the whole spec corpus (reqs, ADRs), which exists on
     both backends.
   - The four rules, each independently toggleable by the presence
     of its config key: ``required-sections`` (per-directive list of
     bold lead-ins that must appear in the body, e.g. Context /
     Decision / Consequences); ``nontrivial-body`` (per-directive
     minimum body length); ``weasel-words`` (configurable word list
     + configurable target directives; flags listed words unless the
     sentence also carries a numeric or behavioral criterion — v1
     may approximate "carries a criterion" as "contains a digit or
     a comparison word"; document the approximation in the rule's
     message); ``unenumerated-quantifiers`` (configurable quantifier
     list + target directives; flags quantifiers not followed by an
     enumeration cue such as ``of the`` / ``listed`` / ``in`` —
     same documented-approximation latitude). Exact TOML key shapes
     are the agent's call within: keys reference DIRECTIVE names,
     validated against the declared ``[[needs.types]]`` (undeclared
     directive in lint config = config hard error, exit 2,
     ADR_0014); word lists live in config, not hardcoded (defaults
     are scaffolded by setup later — ADR_0016 spirit).
   - **Status-aware exemption (implements :need:`ISSUE_0018`'s
     mechanism for lint):** ``exempt_statuses`` key on
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.gate]``, defaulting to
     ``["done", "wontfix"]`` when absent; needs whose status is in
     the list are skipped before any lint rule runs. Build it as
     shared plumbing the future verdict-check verb can reuse.
   - ``pds check`` runs lint automatically AFTER its builder gate
     succeeds, on the needs.json it just built (no second build),
     whenever the lint table is present — no new flag. Builder
     findings and lint findings share the one findings array.
   - Dogfood: enable a minimal lint table in this repo's own
     ``ubproject.toml`` (required sections on ``arch-decision``,
     non-trivial ``issue`` bodies) and keep the gate green; update
     the setup skill's forward-looking-config reference so lint is
     documented as shipped, not future.

   *Acceptance criteria* (each independently verifiable):
   lint with no table exits 0 with empty findings; each of the four
   rules fires on a crafted fixture corpus and stays quiet on a
   clean one; exempt-status needs are skipped (fixture with a
   violating ``done`` need stays clean); lint config naming an
   undeclared directive exits 2 with a config error naming it;
   ``pds check`` on a lint-enabled project includes lint findings
   and exits 1 on violations; this repo's gate (``make strict``)
   stays green with the dogfood lint table enabled; fmt / clippy
   ``-D warnings`` / full test suite green; TDD discipline (tests
   first, behavior through the public interface).

   *Out of scope:* verdict directives and ``pds verdict-check``
   (:need:`ISSUE_0014`); semantic/AI judgment of body quality —
   this verb is mechanical only; linting RST source files directly;
   any ``--with-lint`` style flags; ``search`` / ``dedup``;
   changing the JSON envelope or exit contract (ADR_0019).

.. issue:: Verdict directives and pds verdict-check
   :id: ISSUE_0014
   :status: ready-for-agent
   :kind: feature
   :links: ADR_0015, ADR_0016

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   Today a triage or review judgment lives only in the ``:status:``
   flip and the git history. Make the judgment itself a gate-checkable
   artifact, per :need:`ADR_0015`: register a ``verdict`` need type
   (and role-map entry), have review skills author one verdict
   directive per judged need — derived ID ``VERDICT_<judged-id>``,
   fields ``:rubric:`` / ``:axes_failed:`` / ``:fingerprint:``,
   findings as body prose, linked to the judged need, living in
   ``spec/verdicts/``. Implement ``pds verdict-check``
   (:need:`ADR_0014`): derive pass (``axes_failed`` empty), recompute
   fingerprints from needs.json, and report four buckets — missing /
   failing / stale / malformed — with required types and rubrics read
   from ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.verdicts]`` (:need:`ADR_0016`). Wire
   into ``pds check --with-verdicts``. The payoff:
   ``ready-for-agent`` (:need:`ADR_0005`) can require a passing triage
   verdict on file, not just an edited status field. Depends on
   :need:`ISSUE_0019`.

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   **Triage note (2026-06-07, from closing :need:`ISSUE_0018`):**
   ``pds verdict-check`` must be status-aware — read
   ``gate.exempt_statuses`` (default ``["done", "wontfix"]``) through
   the shared plumbing that ``pds lint`` already uses
   (:need:`ISSUE_0013`), so terminal needs never retroactively fail
   the verdict gate. The exemption contract is pinned end-to-end by
   the lint E2E regression added when ISSUE_0018 closed.

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   **Agent Brief** (grilling session of 2026-06-07; supersedes the
   issue prose above where they differ — notably the
   ``--with-verdicts`` flag, which is dropped). Normative design:
   :need:`ADR_0015` (verdict shape, buckets), :need:`ADR_0016`
   (rubric config). Read both first.

   **Category:** enhancement. **Summary:** verdict directives as
   gate-checkable judgments — register the ``verdict`` type, parse
   rubric/verdict config, implement ``pds verdict-check`` with four
   gating buckets, integrate into ``pds check`` flaglessly, dogfood
   with one tracer verdict.

   **Current behavior.** Judgments live only in ``:status:`` flips.
   The findings envelope has two consumers (builder gate, lint);
   the shared corpus-check plumbing (fresh build, exempt statuses,
   one findings array, skip-on-builder-failure) is established.
   No ``verdict`` type, no rubric config parsing, no
   ``spec/verdicts/``.

   **Desired behavior.**

   - **Config** (raw→validated→fail-on-drift, as lint):
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.rubrics.<name>] axes = [...]`` (each
     rubric non-empty, axes non-empty unique strings);
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.verdicts]`` with
     ``require = { <type> = "<rubric>" }`` (types must be declared
     in ``[[needs.types]]``, rubrics must be declared — undeclared
     either way is exit 2) and optional ``statuses = [...]`` — a
     verdict is demanded only when the judged need's status is in
     the list; key absent = all non-exempt statuses. Amend
     :need:`ADR_0016` with one sentence recording the ``statuses``
     key (precision amendment, decision unchanged).
   - **Verdict shape** per :need:`ADR_0015`: type ``verdict``, ID
     ``VERDICT_<judged-id>``, fields ``:rubric:``,
     ``:axes_failed:`` (list; pass is derived — empty iff pass),
     ``:fingerprint:``, body prose findings, linked to the judged
     need. Status-less.
   - **Fingerprint** (exact, pin in code and tests):
     ``sha256:`` + first 16 lowercase hex of SHA-256 over UTF-8 of
     ``normalize(title) + "\n" + normalize(content)`` (both from
     needs.json), where ``normalize`` collapses every whitespace run
     to one space and trims — applied to each field *separately*, so
     the ``"\n"`` separator survives and a word migrating across the
     title/body boundary invalidates (amended during implementation
     review: joint normalization dissolved the boundary for
     multi-word titles). RST reflow must not invalidate; any word
     change must.
   - **``pds verdict-check``**: shared preamble (fresh build, load),
     then four buckets as findings (:need:`ADR_0019`), all gating
     (exit 1): ``verdict:missing`` (need's type in ``require``,
     status in ``statuses`` scope and not exempt, no
     ``VERDICT_<id>`` exists) — ``need`` = judged need;
     ``verdict:failing`` (``axes_failed`` non-empty) and
     ``verdict:stale`` (recomputed fingerprint mismatch) —
     ``need`` = judged need, verdict ID in the message;
     ``verdict:malformed`` (missing/invalid fields, unknown axis
     for its rubric, undeclared rubric name, or orphaned judged
     need) — ``need`` = the verdict's ID. Exempt-status needs are
     skipped for all buckets; ``verdict``-typed needs are excluded
     from lint and never require verdicts themselves.
   - **``pds check``** runs verdict-check automatically when the
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.verdicts]`` table is present — no flag
     (lint precedent; the issue prose's ``--with-verdicts`` is
     superseded). Order: builder gate, lint, verdict-check, one
     findings array; builder failure skips both check stages.
   - **Dogfood this repo**: register the ``verdict`` type
     (``VERDICT_`` prefix) and role-map entry; create
     ``spec/verdicts/`` wired into the toctree; declare
     ``rubrics.triage`` (axes proposed from the triage skill's
     judgment dimensions, e.g. category / state / actionability /
     duplicate-check), ``require = { issue = "triage" }``,
     ``statuses = ["ready-for-agent", "ready-for-human",
     "in-progress"]``; hand-author ``VERDICT_ISSUE_0014`` as the
     tracer (this issue is the only in-scope need) and keep
     ``make strict`` green.

   **Acceptance criteria.**

   - Unit tests per bucket over fixture corpora (lib-testable, no
     builder), incl.: reflowed body → not stale; one-word edit →
     stale; unknown axis → malformed; exempt status → skipped;
     ``statuses`` scoping in and out; orphan verdict → malformed.
   - E2E: ``pds verdict-check`` exit codes and findings shapes
     frozen via the fake-builder harness; ``pds check`` with a
     verdicts table appends verdict findings after lint's;
     config-drift cases exit 2 naming the offender.
   - Fingerprint normalization pinned by tests exactly as
     specified.
   - Dogfood: ``make strict`` green on this repo with the tracer
     verdict on file; editing this issue's body without
     re-fingerprinting flips the gate red (verify once, then
     restore).
   - fmt, clippy ``-D warnings``, full suite green; CLAUDE.md
     gains the verb in the backlog-verbs bullet.

   **Out of scope.**

   - Skill wiring — /triage and /review authoring verdicts, axis
     semantics in prose, the ready-for-agent pickup contract —
     :need:`ISSUE_0022`.
   - New flags on ``check``; changing the envelope
     (:need:`ADR_0019`); severity levels beyond ``error``.
   - Verdicts for non-issue types in this repo's dogfood config.

.. issue:: pds next and pds status — deterministic backlog queries
   :id: ISSUE_0015
   :status: done
   :kind: improvement

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   An agent driving the backlog should never pick its own work by
   grepping around; it should ask the corpus. Implement two ``pds``
   verbs (:need:`ADR_0014`): ``pds next`` rebuilds needs.json
   (:need:`ADR_0006`) and emits the next actionable issue —
   ``status == ready-for-agent``, lowest ID first — as JSON (id,
   title, status, links); nothing ready is exit 0 with
   ``{"issue": null, "reason": "none-ready"}``. ``pds status`` emits
   per-status counts, giving /triage its "what needs attention"
   buckets (:need:`ADR_0005`) from one query path instead of ad-hoc
   jq per skill. Both verbs emit a versioned JSON shape; on a
   github-backend repo they exit 2 with the equivalent ``gh`` command
   (local-only v1, forward-compatible per :need:`ADR_0014`). Depends
   on :need:`ISSUE_0019`.

.. issue:: Stopping contracts and fail-closed judging in looping skills
   :id: ISSUE_0016
   :status: needs-triage
   :kind: improvement

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   Retrofit three authoring-discipline patterns into the skills that
   loop (/triage, /to-issues, /qa, /tdd, /review):

   - **Stopping and escalation section.** Each looping skill
     enumerates exactly which tool outputs mean success, stop, or
     escalate-to-human — so "stuck" is defined by observable state,
     not by the agent's patience.
   - **Stage-local validation.** A multi-step authoring loop validates
     only the step just produced; the whole-corpus gate
     (:need:`ADR_0007`) runs once at the end. Running the full gate
     per step stays red until everything exists and causes false
     escalation.
   - **Fail-closed judging.** Wherever a skill judges (triage
     recommendation, review verdict): uncertainty is a FAIL with a
     recorded finding, never a silent PASS; a failure with no finding
     is malformed.

   The ``pds`` exit contract (:need:`ADR_0014`) is the substrate for
   the first two patterns: exit 1 means "read the JSON, fix the
   corpus", exit 2 means "stop and escalate" — skills should branch on
   that, not on output prose.

.. issue:: pds dedup and pds search — retrieval over the corpus
   :id: ISSUE_0017
   :status: done
   :kind: improvement
   :implements: FEAT_0001
   :links: ADR_0021

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   /qa already deduplicates against a fresh needs.json build
   (:need:`ISSUE_0005`), but it is the only issue-creating path that
   does, and it improvises the matching. Implement the shared engine
   as two ``pds`` verbs (:need:`ADR_0014`): ``pds dedup "<candidate>"``
   ranks existing needs by similarity and exits 1 when hits reach the
   threshold (a pre-filing gate); ``pds search "<query>"`` is the
   neutral query form (always exit 0). Both return ranked
   ``{id, title, score, engine}`` JSON. v1 engine is BM25 — in-memory,
   deterministic, offline; neural embeddings come later behind a cargo
   feature and ``--engine embed`` with lazy model download, without
   changing the JSON contract. Then point every issue-creating path
   (/qa, /to-issues, /triage) at ``pds dedup`` before filing. Depends
   on :need:`ISSUE_0019`.

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   **Agent Brief** (grilling session of 2026-06-07; the retrieval
   contract is pinned by :need:`ADR_0021` — read it first).

   **Category:** enhancement. **Summary:** add ``pds search`` and
   ``pds dedup`` — BM25 retrieval over a fresh corpus, with a
   normalized-score pre-filing gate on dedup.

   **Current behavior.** No ``pds`` verb ranks needs by similarity;
   /qa improvises matching with ad-hoc jq. The query-verb plumbing
   (backend guard → fresh build → corpus load) already exists as the
   shared preamble used by ``pds status`` / ``pds next``.

   **Desired behavior.**

   - ``pds search "<query>"``: shared preamble, then rank all need
     types by similarity; emit hits; always exit 0 (exit 2 reserved
     for tool/config errors, e.g. an empty query string).
   - ``pds dedup "<candidate>"``: same ranking; verdict
     ``duplicate`` and exit 1 iff at least one **issue-typed** hit
     scores ≥ threshold; non-issue hits are listed but never gate.
   - JSON per :need:`ADR_0019` / :need:`ADR_0021`: top-level
     ``schema``, ``verb``, ``engine: "bm25"``; ``hits`` descending
     by ``score`` with deterministic id tie-break, capped at a small
     constant (e.g. 10); dedup adds ``threshold`` and ``verdict``.
     Hits are not findings-shaped — dedup is a query verb that
     gates, not a check-shaped verb.
   - Engine: hand-rolled Okapi BM25 (``k1 = 1.2``, ``b = 0.75`` as
     code constants) in a pds-core retrieval module of pure
     functions over the loaded corpus, lib-testable without a
     builder — mirror the existing pure-query module's shape. Zero
     new dependencies.
   - Tokenization: lowercase, split on non-alphanumerics, drop
     empties; no stemming, no stopword list; digit tokens kept (need
     ids in bodies become searchable). Field weighting by token
     repetition: title ×3, tags ×2, content ×1 (code constants).
   - ``score`` is the 0–1 self-score ratio per :need:`ADR_0021`; a
     document matched against its own text scores ≈ 1.0.
   - Config: ``threshold`` (float, 0–1) under
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.dedup]``; ``--threshold`` flag overrides.
     Pick the shipped default by eyeballing real hits against this
     repo's corpus and record the chosen value in the config docs.
   - Degenerate cases: empty corpus → empty hits, ``unique``,
     exit 0; query whose every token is unknown to the corpus →
     empty hits, ``unique``, exit 0.

   **Acceptance criteria.**

   - Dogfood: ``pds search "lint gate"`` on this repo exits 0 and
     ranks gate-related needs; ``pds dedup`` fed a near-copy of an
     existing open issue body exits 1 with ``verdict: duplicate``;
     fed novel text it exits 0 with ``verdict: unique``.
   - A non-issue need scoring above threshold does not flip the
     verdict (unit test).
   - A title match outranks an equivalent content match (unit test).
   - Self-match normalization ≈ 1.0 within float tolerance (unit
     test).
   - Tie-break and ranking are deterministic across runs.
   - assert_cmd/trycmd end-to-end tests freeze both verbs' exit
     codes and stdout shapes, as for the existing verbs.
   - cargo fmt, clippy, and test pass; CLAUDE.md's backlog-verbs
     paragraph mentions the two new verbs.

   **Out of scope.**

   - Wiring /qa, /to-issues, /triage to ``pds dedup`` —
     :need:`ISSUE_0021`.
   - The embed engine, ``--engine`` flag, and model download.
   - A GitHub-backend driver (guard exits 2 with a ``gh`` hint, as
     the existing query verbs do).
   - Stemming, stopwords, true BM25F, configurable BM25 parameters.

.. issue:: Status-aware exemption for corpus checks
   :id: ISSUE_0018
   :status: wontfix
   :kind: improvement

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   Any corpus-wide check added by :need:`ISSUE_0013` or
   :need:`ISSUE_0014` must be status-aware: needs whose status is
   terminal (``done``, ``wontfix``) are excluded from lint and verdict
   requirements before any check runs. Otherwise every new gate
   retroactively fails the whole closed backlog and the gates get
   disabled instead of trusted. Declare the exempt-status list once in
   ``ubproject.toml`` under ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.gate]``
   (:need:`ADR_0014`) so every ``pds`` check reads the same policy.

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   **Wontfix (2026-06-07): already shipped via :need:`ISSUE_0013`.**
   The requested mechanism exists exactly as specified —
   ``gate.exempt_statuses`` (default ``["done", "wontfix"]``), read
   as shared plumbing by ``pds lint``, with a need carrying no status
   never exempt. Unit-tested in pds-core and, as part of this
   closure, pinned end-to-end by a binary-level regression (a
   ``done`` need with a violating body produces no findings; the
   same body with no status is flagged). The remaining clause —
   verdict-check must honor the same policy — is recorded as a
   triage note on :need:`ISSUE_0014`, where that work lives.

.. issue:: Scaffold the pds-cli crate and release pipeline
   :id: ISSUE_0019
   :status: done
   :kind: feature
   :links: ADR_0018, ADR_0019, ADR_0020

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   The foundation for :need:`ADR_0014`: a Rust workspace at ``cli/``
   (``pds-core`` lib + ``pds-cli`` bin per :need:`ADR_0018`),
   versioned in lockstep with the skills. Scope of this issue:

   - crate skeleton with the verb dispatcher, config loader for
     ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.*]`` (incl. role-map resolution and
     fail-on-drift, exit 2; discovery per :need:`ADR_0020`),
     needs.json reader, and the builder
     adapter (``ubc check`` + ``ubc build needs`` /
     ``uv run sphinx-build -W -b needs`` per :need:`ADR_0017`) —
     enough to ship ``pds build`` and ``pds check`` structural mode;
   - JSON-only stdout + 0/1/2 exit contract as shared verb plumbing
     (envelope per :need:`ADR_0019`);
   - CI: fmt, clippy, test on the Rust pipeline next to the sphinx
     gate;
   - release workflow: static binaries for ``aarch64-apple-darwin``,
     ``x86_64-apple-darwin``, ``x86_64-unknown-linux-musl``,
     ``aarch64-unknown-linux-musl`` to GitHub Releases, an
     ``install.sh``, and ``cargo publish`` of ``pds-cli`` (name
     verified available);
   - **macOS Gatekeeper**: downloaded binaries may be blocked when a
     quarantine attribute is set. Decide and implement the story:
     Developer ID codesigning + notarization in the release workflow
     when certificates are available; until then, at minimum ad-hoc
     signing (required on arm64), an ``install.sh`` that clears the
     quarantine attribute on the installed binary with the user's
     consent, and a documented ``cargo install`` fallback (locally
     built binaries are never quarantined).

   Implementation preferences (grilling of 2026-06-06): two
   increments — skeleton + CI first, release pipeline second.
   Dependency stack: clap (derive), serde + serde_json, toml;
   thiserror in ``pds-core``, anyhow only in the bin. TDD against
   fixture corpora (small needs.json + ubproject.toml pairs under
   ``cli/tests/fixtures/``, builder mocked via a fake-builder
   script), plus assert_cmd/trycmd end-to-end tests freezing the
   exit-code and stdout/stderr contract. Edition 2024, stable pinned
   via ``rust-toolchain.toml``, ``rust-version`` tracks the pin with
   no MSRV promise. Release increment uses cargo-dist per
   :need:`ADR_0018`.

   Windows is deferred (``cargo install`` is the escape hatch). The
   other ``pds`` verbs land via :need:`ISSUE_0013` /
   :need:`ISSUE_0014` / :need:`ISSUE_0015` / :need:`ISSUE_0017` on top
   of this scaffold.

.. issue:: Wire pds into setup, gate, and docs
   :id: ISSUE_0020
   :status: done
   :kind: feature

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   Once :need:`ISSUE_0019` ships, integrate ``pds`` into the system:

   - ``/setup-patdhlk-skills`` detects ``pds`` on PATH, offers
     ``install.sh`` when missing (same dance as ``ubc``), and
     scaffolds the default config: ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.gate]``,
     ``.lint``, ``.rubrics.*``, ``.verdicts`` tables
     (:need:`ADR_0016`) plus the ``verdict`` type and role-map entry
     (:need:`ADR_0015`);
   - ``make strict`` becomes a thin alias for ``pds check``
     (:need:`ADR_0017`); the html build moves to a docs-publishing CI
     step;
   - CLAUDE.md and the affected skill texts switch their gate and
     query instructions to ``pds`` verbs where they exist (ad-hoc
     reads stay jq per :need:`ADR_0006`).

.. issue:: Wire issue-creating skills to pds dedup
   :id: ISSUE_0021
   :status: done
   :kind: improvement
   :implements: FEAT_0001
   :links: ISSUE_0017

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   Once :need:`ISSUE_0017` ships, point every issue-creating path at
   ``pds dedup`` before filing. Split out of :need:`ISSUE_0017`
   during the grilling of 2026-06-07: the verbs are cargo work with
   crisp gate criteria; this is skill-prose engineering with UX
   judgment in it.

   Scope:

   - /qa, /to-issues, and /triage run ``pds dedup "<candidate>"``
     before filing any new issue and branch on the exit code
     (:need:`ADR_0014`): exit 1 → surface the ranked hits to the
     user and ask before filing; exit 0 → file; exit 2 → stop and
     escalate.
   - Delete /qa's improvised needs.json matching
     (:need:`ISSUE_0005`) in favor of the shared verb.
   - Decide per skill how a ``duplicate`` verdict reads to the user
     (block vs. warn vs. ask), including the "hit is an ADR or a
     done issue — the report may already be shipped" case that
     all-types ranking (:need:`ADR_0021`) surfaces.
   - Fall back gracefully when ``pds`` is not on PATH (the
     pre-:need:`ISSUE_0020` dance).

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   **Agent Brief** (grilling session of 2026-06-07; supersedes the
   scope sketch above where they differ).

   **Category:** enhancement. **Summary:** wire the issue-creating
   skills to the shipped retrieval verbs — ``pds dedup`` as the
   pre-filing gate in /qa and /to-issues, ``pds search`` as routing
   evidence in /triage — and delete /qa's improvised matching.

   **Current behavior.** /qa builds an improvised dedup corpus
   (fresh needs.json or ``gh issue list`` titles) and free-form
   matches against it. /to-issues files confirmed slices with no
   dedup. /triage judges duplicates during routing with no
   mechanized evidence. ``pds dedup``/``pds search`` exist
   (:need:`ISSUE_0017`, :need:`ADR_0021`) but nothing calls them.

   **Desired behavior.** All wiring is skill-prose (SKILL.md edits)
   only — zero pds code changes.

   - **Verb split.** /qa and /to-issues evaluate candidates not yet
     in the corpus: they run ``pds dedup "<candidate>"`` and branch
     on the exit code (:need:`ADR_0014`). /triage judges issues
     already in the corpus: it runs ``pds search`` with the issue's
     text as routing evidence — no gate, exit 0; the prose notes
     that the top hit is the issue itself and must be skipped.
   - **Candidate text** is always the full draft (title plus body),
     never a bare title — short queries saturate the normalized
     score (:need:`ADR_0021`) and over-gate.
   - **/qa**: on exit 1, one short ask built from the hits —
     status-aware: an open-issue hit offers *append detail to the
     existing issue* as the default; a ``done``-issue or ADR hit
     reads "this may already be shipped — file as regression?".
     Never a hard block; never silent filing. The step-1 improvised
     corpus procedure is deleted; on the sphinx-needs branch step 1
     keeps only the glossary-terms read (domain language). The
     github branch keeps its ``gh issue list`` title matching,
     labeled as the github path (``pds dedup`` exits 2 there —
     no v1 driver).
   - **/to-issues**: dedup runs per slice at plan time (step 2),
     before the one confirmation round — a gating hit becomes a
     plan annotation ("slice N collides with ISSUE_XXXX — propose
     extending its ``:implements:`` instead"), not a second ask at
     filing time.
   - **/triage**: the search hits feed route rule 1
     (duplicate → wontfix with the twin's ID) and the
     already-shipped judgment; the existing routing-table
     confirmation is unchanged.
   - **Exit 2** anywhere → stop and escalate; never improvise
     around it.
   - **pds missing from PATH**: one loud line at skill start
     pointing at /setup-patdhlk-skills (:need:`ISSUE_0020`), then
     degrade — /qa falls back to a one-sentence jq title scan (not
     the old procedure), /to-issues and /triage simply skip the
     enrichment. The deletion of the old engine stays real.

   **Acceptance criteria.**

   - /qa's SKILL.md no longer contains the improvised dedup-corpus
     procedure; its sphinx-needs filing loop branches on
     ``pds dedup`` exit codes; its hard rule about never silently
     filing a twin survives.
   - /to-issues' slicing plan step documents the per-slice dedup
     and the collision-annotation form.
   - /triage's routing step documents the ``pds search`` evidence
     read, including the skip-the-self-hit instruction.
   - All three document the exit-2 escalation and the
     pds-missing degradation; /qa documents the github branch
     explicitly.
   - ``make strict`` passes (the skills are prose, but the gate
     guards this issue's status flip).
   - Dogfood: a /qa session against this repo with a paraphrase of
     an existing issue surfaces the twin and asks instead of
     filing.

   **Out of scope.**

   - Any pds code change (no ``--exclude`` flag, no github driver,
     no new verbs).
   - Rewriting the skills beyond the dedup/search touchpoints.
   - The installed-skill copies under ``~/.claude/skills`` — the
     repo's ``skills/*/SKILL.md`` are the deliverable.

.. issue:: Wire judgment skills to author verdict directives
   :id: ISSUE_0022
   :status: needs-triage
   :kind: improvement
   :implements: FEAT_0001
   :links: ISSUE_0014

   *This was generated by AI during triage.*

   Once :need:`ISSUE_0014` ships the ``verdict`` machinery, wire the
   skills that judge. Split out during the grilling of 2026-06-07,
   same pattern as :need:`ISSUE_0021`: the verb is cargo work with
   crisp gates; this is skill-prose engineering. Filed past the
   ``pds dedup`` gate: the duplicate hit (ISSUE_0014, 0.78) is the
   parent this issue deliberately splits from.

   Scope:

   - /triage authors or updates ``VERDICT_<id>`` when routing an
     issue to ``ready-for-agent`` / ``ready-for-human`` — rubric
     from ``[tool.patdhlk-skills.verdicts]``, fingerprint computed
     per :need:`ADR_0015`, findings as body prose.
   - /review authors review verdicts for the needs its Spec axis
     judges.
   - Axis semantics written into the skills' prose
     (:need:`ADR_0016`: the binary validates names, the skill
     defines meaning — e.g. what ``actionability`` requires a
     triager to have checked).
   - The ready-for-agent pickup contract (/triage's report,
     ``pds next`` consumers) references a passing, fresh triage
     verdict, not just the status field.
   - Fail-closed judging (:need:`ISSUE_0016` pattern): an
     uncertain judgment is a failing axis with a recorded finding,
     never a silent pass.
